---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.17.3
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python (tseda)
  language: python
  name: tseda
---

# Tseda in a notebook

This notebook provides a minimum working example of how to load a
tseda file into a notebook and how to make use of the application
widgets as standalone objects. The example is based on the test file
`test.trees.tsdate.tseda` that can be found in the tests data folder.

Note that the API is still in development and that this notebook is
meant to showcase basic functionality as currently implemented.
Notably, it is currently not possible to modify the size of widgets,
and accessing individual plots would benefit from an improved method
naming system.

## Module setup

First load the relevant `tseda` modules and `panel` extension for
tables.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
import panel as pn
pn.extension("tabulator")
from tseda import datastore, model, vpages
```

The `datastore` module defines the classes that are used by all
application pages, namely

- `SampleSetsTable`: manages and displays information about sample sets
- `IndividualsTable`: handles individual data, such as population and
  sample set assignments
- `DataStore`: provides access to the underlying `TreeSequence` data
  as well as the tables described above

`model` defines a model of the tree sequence data called `TSModel`.
This is a modified version of
[`tsbrowse.model.TSModel`](https://github.com/tskit-dev/tsbrowse/blob/main/tsbrowse/model.py).

Finally, `vpages` holds a mapping to the application pages and widgets
which can be instantiated by calling the relevant constructor method.

## Setting up the datastore

We instantiate a `model.TSModel` by providing a path to a `tseda` file:

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
tsm = model.TSModel("../../tests/data/test.trees.tsdate.tseda")
type(tsm)
```

Note that the input `tseda` file must have been generated by running
`tseda preprocess` on an input compressed tree sequence file. In order
to instantiate a `datastore.DataStore` object, we first need to
generate two tables.

We first make the `SampleSetsTable`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
sample_sets_table = datastore.make_sample_sets_table(tsm)
sample_sets_table
```

This table defines the [sample
sets](https://tskit.dev/tskit/docs/stable/stats.html#sample-sets-and-indexes)
used in the analyses. The starting table consists of the populations
defined in the input tree sequence file, but custom sample sets can be
added later on. Names and colors can be edited.

Next we load the `IndividualsTable`. We need to connect it to the
current `sample_sets_table` and we set the `page_size` attribute to
reduce the number of individuals shown by default.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
individuals_table = datastore.make_individuals_table(tsm)
# NB: this is a bug; we need to set the sample_sets_table manually
individuals_table.sample_sets_table = sample_sets_table
individuals_table.page_size = 10
individuals_table
```

Briefly, this table displays the individual samples and corresponding
metadata, such as population, name, longitude, and latitude. Note the
distinction between `population`, which is immutable and corresponds
to the original population assignment in the input tree sequence file,
and `sample_set_id`, which is a placeholder for the **current**
population assignment. By modifying this column, we can make arbitrary
population (sample set) assignments to individual samples. Finally,
the `selected` column lets us exclude samples from subsequent
analyses.

With these three data structures in place, we can now define the
`datastore.DataStore` model:

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
ds = datastore.DataStore(tsm=tsm, individuals_table=individuals_table,
    sample_sets_table=sample_sets_table)
```

## Accessing vpages

The `vpages` module has an attribute `PAGES` that lists the available
application pages:

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
vpages.PAGES
```

Every page is instantiated by passing along the `ds` object, as we
show in the subsequent sections.

### Overview

The overview page summarizes the tree sequence object.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
ov = vpages.PAGES[0](datastore=ds)
ov
```

### Individuals page

The individuals page displays three widgets:

1. a map with sampling locations
2. the sample set table
3. the individuals table.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
indp = vpages.PAGES[1](datastore=ds)
indp
```

Each widget can be accessed by calling the corresponding attributes,
which here are `geomap`, `sample_sets_table`, and `individuals_table`.

The individuals page also has a `sidebar` function which is used in
the application to modify tables, assign new sample sets and so on.
This functionality does not yet work in the notebook setting however,
so any modification of the datastore object must be done by editing
the object manually.

### Structure

The structure page summarizes population-wide genealogical nearest
neighbor (GNN) values and $F_{st}$.

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
struct = vpages.PAGES[2](datastore=ds)
struct
```

### Individual GNN

The indivdual GNN page displays three widgets:

1. a map with sampling locations
2. a bar plot of individual-based GNN values, based on the current
   sample set definitions
3. a widget, initially empty, for plotting chromosome-level GNN values

Instead of drawing the entire page, we here show how to access the
initial widgets, starting with the bar plot of individual GNN values:

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
ignn = vpages.PAGES[3](datastore=ds)
ignn.vbar
```

Note that the plot is interactive and that you have a variety of bokeh
tools, displayed on the right, to choose from, to interact with the
plot.

As mentioned, the chromosome level GNN is empty to begin with:

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
ignn.gnnhaplotype
```

However, we can set the `individual_id` attribute to actually plot the
haplotypes. Note that these values are calculated on the fly and may
be slow for large samples!

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
ignn.gnnhaplotype.individual_id = 12
ignn.gnnhaplotype
```

### Statistics

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
stats = vpages.PAGES[4](datastore=ds)
stats
```

### Trees

```{code-cell} ipython3
---
:tags: [show-input, show-output]
---
trees = vpages.PAGES[5](datastore=ds)
trees
```
